Block Node (#1081)
hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals: HIP/hip-1081.md

8. As a block node operator I want to answer all queries available from the consensus node.
9. As a block node operator I want to answer additional queries not available from the consensus node.
10. As a block node operator I want to “catch up” with the latest block(s) from a consensus node if my node falls
behind the latest block.
11. As a block node operator I want to “catch up” with the latest blocks from other block nodes if my node falls too
far behind the latest block.
12. As a block node operator I want to receive the unfiltered and unverified block stream from one or more block nodes,
from one or more  consensus nodes, or from both.
13. As a mirror node operator I want to receive the unfiltered and unverified block stream from a block node with the
minimum possible latency.
14. As a custom dApp I want to receive an unfiltered and unverified block stream from a block node with the minimum
possible latency.
15. As a custom dApp I want to receive the block stream starting at any historical block and continue forward from that
point indefinitely.
16. As a custom dApp I want an API to request a snapshot of the state, as of an arbitrary historical block, from a

> block node.

Author: Fair point. We could make this periodic state snapshots to start with

consensus node.
21. As a consensus node operator I want to retrieve a very recent state snapshot from a block node if I “fall behind”
and must “reconnect” with the network.
22. As a consensus node operator I want to have an “address book” of block nodes where I can send my block stream
and/or request a state snapshot or recent blocks.
23. As a consensus node operator I want a configurable trust score for block nodes listed in my “address book” so I can
determine, in software, the best choice(s) of block node(s) to use.
  
## Specification

The block node at its simplest will be another node server that offers APIs to consumers to obtain needed network
information and insights. Clean extendable schemas and easy to consume APIs are important to reach this goal

### Block Stream Schema

The Block node will support the streaming and parsing of Block Stream messages in protocol buffer format, as specified
in the [hedera-protobuf repository](https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-protobufs/tree/main/block/stream).

<aside>
🚨 **Open Task:** Explain how to handle 

- protobuf version upgrades

> - pause in stream due to CN upgrades

Author: Agreed, will add

block in its entirety.
The `singleBlock` endpoint will allow a consumer to request a single verified block from the block node.

```protobuf
/**
 * Remote procedure calls (RPCs) for the Block Node Block services.
 */
service BlockAccessService {
    /**
     * Read a single block from the block node.
     */
    rpc singleBlock(SingleBlockRequest) returns (SingleBlockResponse);
}
```

<aside>
🚨 **Open Task:** Add all known response codes for API
</aside>

#### State Service

Live state, snapshot, changes and single entity state

```protobuf
/**
 * Remote procedure calls (RPCs) for the Block Node State snapshot
 * and query services.
 */
service StateService {
    /**
     * Read a state snapshot from the block node.
     */
    rpc stateSnapshot(StateSnapshotRequest) returns (StateSnapshotResponse);
}
```

<aside>
🚨 **Open Task:** Flesh out 3 different state related query endpoints
1. State snapshot - covering latest state and historical state. All cases represent verified state at the end of a
    block.
2. State changes e.g. what state changes occurred in block x, this is a subset of the block query and avoid the

>     transmission of extra block information beyond state

Author: Good point

Noting the 3 different proof types
1. Block Proof
2. Block Item Proof 
3. State Proof
</aside>

### Discovery

To ensure a robust decentralized network it is important for block nodes to be easily discovered by clients.

<aside>
🚨 **Open Task:** Explain how block nodes provide discovery details. 
Considerations
- Are they self reported?
- Are they onchain?
- What requirements if any are there for a block node and operator?
</aside>

<aside>
🚨 **Open Task:** Explain how block nodes are discovered
- by a client so they can query data
- by a CN so they can push data e.g. by address book
</aside>

### Monetization

Block nodes will perform significant work by consuming the block stream, verifying it, storing it and providing
multiple API services to further users. To block node operators it is thus important to offer capabilities to cover
the cost of work and encourage a vibrant economy.

To achieve this the Block Node will adopt a charge card comparable model with crypto transfers of hbar required prior
to the consumption of APIs. The block node will initially manage an hbar ledger on node to track the remaining hbar
balance that an account ID holds with the block node.

> To achieve this it is required that a block node have it's own account Id that users can transfer hbar to.

Author: We can mention it as an idea but let's see as it's still early here

webinars will be essential. Technical documentation will provide detailed and in-depth explanations of operation modes,
usage, and best practices, ensuring that developers and mirror node operators can fully understand and transition to
block stream consumption from a block node as well as block node hosting.

Blogs will offer more accessible and engaging content, highlighting use cases, real-world applications, and the benefits
of a block node, catering to a broader audience of Hedera stakeholders. Webinars will serve as interactive platforms
for live demonstrations, Q&A sessions, and expert insights, enabling participants to gain a deeper understanding through
direct engagement with subject matter experts.

## Reference Implementation

## Rejected Ideas

### BN to CN staking as a requirement for a CN before streaming to a BN.
It was suggested that to help incentivize long term block nodes that a BN would stake some minimum amount of HBAR to a
CN. In which upon reward of the full staking period a BN would recuperate staking rewards but also additional reward
for offering DA

> ### BN to CN staking as a mechanism to ensure long term DA

Author: In web3 and EVM land yes. Needs more traction in Hedera specifically.
I'll call it out

It was suggested that to help incentivize long term block nodes that staked and consumed a stream for at least the
staking period would receive an additional reward for offering DA

### App to BN allowances to pay for API usage
It was suggested that one mechanism of paying in advance would be for a client such as a BN or MN or app to first offer
a BN an allowance of some amount of HBAR. The BN would then periodically debit from the allowance to pay itself after
responding to a clients calls. The issue was there was a fear that the client to rescind the allowance after time and a
BN would be 1 or 2 blocks in time off of the accurate allowances which could result in services offered for free if the

> client was being malicious

Author: Yes, good point

### BlockItem Service
Returning a single request BlockItem seemed to not be a valuable service out of the gate. 
Especially without the ability to cleanly identify an item it doesn’t seem worthwhile for a BN to return a BlockItem vs
a Block.

### Gossiping Block Node
<aside>
🚨 **Open Task:** Summarize initial claims and initial reasons to not support
</aside>

## Open Issues

- [ ] Q: “As a block node operator I should be able to attach custom plugins to the block node, which can utilize its
    functionality.” How should this intent be highlighted in specification. Are the detail more implementation and future
    expansions that should be captured in separate HIPs and product EPICs?
- [ ] Q: Does the block node require or rely on a transmission of full state from a CN? If so what’s the contract between

> nodes here? Previously the CN output state every 15 mins

Reviewer: Block Nodes that _manage live state_ or _produce state snapshots_ require a state snapshot to start up if not active since genesis for that network. That snapshot should, however, be transferred manually (either from cloud storage or another block node).

The consensus node, in a block stream mode, should _not ever_ transmit a state snapshot to another system.  State snapshots in this realm are _local backup_ only and should be short-lived ephemeral data (if stored at all).
One of the major benefits of block nodes is that we remove the bandwidth, processing, and complexity of managing state snapshot transfers from consensus nodes entirely.

If a running block node ever needs a state snapshot for some reason, the best place to get one is another block node.

data—such as blocks and state—is processed, verified, stored, and distributed to downstream services.
Block Nodes receive block streams from consensus nodes (or other block stream producers), maintain network state,
and enable critical capabilities including state proofs, block item proofs, and node sync and bootstrap services.
By assuming responsibility for long-term block and state storage, Block Nodes will replace the current use of cloud
storage buckets for distributing data to Mirror Nodes and other block stream parsing clients. Additionally, by
maintaining network state, Block Nodes offload key data management functions from consensus nodes, improving
scalability and operational efficiency.

In addition to their core network functions, Block Nodes expose robust APIs to provide filtered or full data streams,
enable random access, and offer cryptographic proofs. This architecture fosters a decentralized data services layer,
where independent operators can deliver value-added services such as analytics, aggregation, and real-time data
pipelines—further decentralizing the network and enhancing data availability, security, and usability.

> Block Nodes are free to innovate on payment for the provision of dat (blocks, state etc) -- they can be commercial and

Reviewer: Typo, and replace `--` with &mdash;
```suggestion
Block Nodes are free to innovate on payment for the provision of data (blocks, state etc) &mdash; they can be commercial and
```

Author: Updated

> have connectivity rules / rate limits / SLAs for customers with settlement in native cryptocurrency, web2 pay walls or

Reviewer: Missing `,`, and slight wording adjustment.
```suggestion
have connectivity rules / rate limits / SLAs for customers with settlement in native cryptocurrency, web2 payments, or
```

Author: Updated

at no cost.

Notably, in addition to replacing the cloud storage buckets, Block Nodes will:
- Take over block and state storage responsibilities.
- Provide reconnection services to consensus nodes and other Block Nodes.
- Offer cryptographic proofs to users and mirror nodes, enhancing security and decentralization.

> ![Block Node Architecture](../assets/hip-1081/images/block_node_network_architecture.svg)

Reviewer: Note, there are some items in this diagram that should be adjusted to reflect the current state of intended design and usage.

block stream

```protobuf
/**
 * Remote procedure calls (RPCs) for the Block-Node block stream publishing services.
 */
service BlockStreamPublishService {
    /**
     * Publish a stream of blocks.
     */
    rpc publishBlockStream(stream PublishStreamRequest) returns (stream PublishStreamResponse);
}
```

For multiple reasons including security and ease of data rate controls the consensus node will push block stream data
to a block node. As such a block node must be ready and available to accept connections that push the block stream to
the node as blocks are agreed upon by the network. In this mode the Consensus Node or other block stream clients act as
the Producer feeding the block node data.

A summarized handshake of communication between a publisher and BN is as follows
- A publisher will send a Block Header item on connection
- A block node will accept the stream if it is the next block or the node has no cache of previous blocks. 
    - If the block is less than the last known block, the block node will respond with a `DuplicateBlock` response
    including details of the last known block. In this case the Block Node itself may explore a backfill path from

>     another block node to resolve gaps in blocks where applicable.

Author: Removed as that's not correct.

    - If the block is greater than the last known block, the block node will respond with a `Behind` response including
    details of the last known block. A publisher must send either an earlier block or an `EndOfStream` in response. If
    an an `EndOfStream` is sent by the publisher it must include its earliest known block to signal to the Block Node
    how large of a catchup range it must resolve. In this case the Block Node itself may explore a backfill path from

>     another block node to resolve gaps in blocks where applicable.

Author: Updated

- During streaming errors may occur from either side.
    - If a Publisher detects an error it must send an `EndStream` response in the next BlockItem. A Block Node will

>     drop unverified blocks from that Publisher.

Author: Updated

    - If a Block Node detects an error it will send an `EndStream` response in the next BlockItem to all publishers.
    A publisher must respond with a a replay of the given block in sessions and will apply exponential

>     backoff if the error repeats.

Author: Updated

information to synchronize and begin participating in consensus or data services.

Today, this is handled by other consensus nodes, which temporarily assume a “teacher” role, assisting peer nodes in
catching up by sharing recent Hashgraph data and state snapshots. While effective, this approach imposes additional
bandwidth and processing burdens on consensus node resources that are better dedicated to executing transactions and
maintaining consensus integrity.

To support consensus network scalability and improve role specialization, Block Nodes will assume this teacher function.
They will act as reliable sources for Consensus Nodes or Block Nodes that need to bootstrap or resynchronize with the 
consensus network, reducing load on consensus infrastructure and improving overall recovery and onboarding performance.

```protobuf
/**
 * Remote procedure calls (RPCs) for the Block Node reconnect services.
 */
service ReconnectService {
  /**
   * Request reconnect data comprised of state and block data from the block node.
   */
  rpc reconnect(ReconnectRequest) returns (stream ReconnectResponse);
}

> ```

Author: Let's see, my guess is not. Especially if CN and BN use the same API.
We have more time to flesh out the spec section so hoping to have a bit more clarity. 
If not we can always remove

> ```

Author: Removed

This endpoint allows clients to initiate a pull-based stream of block items directly from a Block Node.

Clients may optionally specify filters to limit streamed content to block items relevant to their use case—for example,
filtering by HCS topic. Filtering occurs at the block item level, allowing dApps to receive only the data they need.
Future enhancements may include more advanced filtering based on state deltas or multi-item patterns.

```protobuf
/**
 * Remote procedure calls (RPCs) for the Block Node Stream subscribing services.
 */
service BlockStreamSubscribeService {
    /**
     * Subscribe to a stream of blocks.
     */
    rpc subscribeBlockStream(SubscribeStreamRequest) returns (stream SubscribeStreamResponse);
}
```

An overview of communication between a Block Node and a subscriber is as follows:
1. A client initiates a subscription request, specifying:
    - A block start (required).
    - A block end (optional).
2. The Block Node validates the request:
    - If the requested start block is earlier than available data, it responds with `INVALID_START_BLOCK_NUMBER`.

>     - If the requested end block exceeds available data, it responds with `INVALID_END_BLOCK_NUMBER`.

Author: Removed. 
I need to do a revamp of the protocol and APIs based on latest designs. A lot in the current doc has changed

    - If the end block is set to 0, the stream is treated as open-ended, continuing until:
        - The client disconnects,
        - The Block Node enforces a streaming limit,
        - A network communication error occurs, or
        - The Block Node restarts.

> Note: A stream of state changes highlighting the changes in a given block may be obtained by utilizing block item
filtering on the block service.

###### Error Handling
If an error occurs during streaming, the Block Node will terminate the stream with an EndStream response in place of
the next BlockItem. Clients may choose to retry the stream from the last successfully received block or switch to a
different Block Node for continued access.

Subscribe block stream API response codes and their details are noted below

| Response code                 | Description   |
| ----------------------------- | ------------- |
| `UNKNOWN`                     | The server software failed to set a status and SHALL be considered a software defect. |
| `SUCCESS`                     | The request succeeded. |

> | `INVALID_START_BLOCK_NUMBER`  | The requested start block number is not valid. |

Author: We shouldn't have Java specific logic in our API. That's an implementation details

> | `INVALID_START_BLOCK_NUMBER`  | The requested start block number is not valid. |

Reviewer: Sure, the reason we have the specific limits is Java implementation detail.
The actual limitations (start must be less than `2^63 - 1`) is an API element.
Setting `uint64_max` to get "start at the latest block" is also an API element.

behavior across versions.

## User stories

### Personas

- **Hiero Consensus Node Operators**: Enterprise-aligned operators responsible for validating transactions, maintaining
    network consensus, and producing block streams.
- **Independent Node Operators**: Independent entities running Block Nodes to support decentralized data access,
    historical state services, or value-added APIs.
- **Mirror Node Operators**: Infrastructure providers consuming verified data from Block Nodes to serve RESTful
    endpoints for block explorers dApps and analytics tools.
- **Application Developers / dApp Builders**: Developers building decentralized applications that depend on reliable
    access to historical or real-time block and state data
- **Auditors / Analysts / Researchers**: Users performing independent validation of transactions, querying historical
    state, or analyzing consensus network behavior for compliance or insight

### User Stories

#### Consensus Node Operators

1. As a Consensus Node Operator, I want to publish block streams to one or more Block Nodes, so that I can offload long
term data storage responsibilities and focus server resources on consensus operations.

> 

Reviewer: Suggested stories
1. As a consensus node I want to know that the block node(s) I send my blocks to are trustworthy so that I can trust acknowledgement truly represents secure persistence of a verified block.
1. As a consensus node I want to know that I can access a reconnect API with high enough priority and performance to effectively recover synchronization with the consensus network.

Author: Added

and recovery capabilities to other nodes and clients.
4. As a Block Node Operator, I want to serve real-time block streams via a `subscribe` API, so that clients can access
up-to-date consensus network activity as it happens.
5. As a Block Node Operator, I want to provide historical block access via a `getBlock` API, so that users can retrieve
and analyze past blocks on demand.
6. As a Block Node Operator, I want to offer APIs for querying current and historical state, so that clients can
understand the evolution of Hiero entities (account, smart contracts, files, tokens, topics and schedules) over time.
7. As a Block Node Operator, I want to offer proof APIs for external validation of blocks and state, so that third
parties can verify the correctness of consensus network data without relying on trust in my services.
8. As a Block Node Operator, I want to support Reconnect APIs for syncing new or lagging nodes (Consensus or Block), so
they can catch up to the latest block and state information from the consensus network efficiently and securely.
9. As a Block Node Operator, I want to subscribe to verified block streams from other Block Nodes, so that I can

> increase redundancy, expand coverage, or fill data gaps.

Reviewer: Should this be _unverified_?

Author: I believe we removed the ability to stream unverified blocks right. So data going out of the subscribeBlockStream will always be verified blocks.

Reviewer: It's the reverse.
We removed the option to stream _verified_ blocks, so what is sent out is always considered _unverified_.
There is no reason for _verified_ blocks, as the block node should always be considered _untrusted_; the recipient should always verify the block proof themselves.

10. As a Block Node Operator, I want to expose a publish endpoint for upstream publishers, so that Consensus Nodes or
other Block Nodes can push block items directly to me.
11. As a Block Node Operator, I want to expose a serverStatus API to report my current capabilities, so that clients
can discover my block range, and service availability.
12. As a Block Node Operator, I want to offer filtered block streams to external clients, so that consumers only
receive the data relevant to their use cases, reducing bandwidth and processing overhead

> 

Reviewer: Suggested addition
1. As a Block Node Operator I want to maintain a block node that only stores the data within blocks that is important to me so that I do not incur the cost of maintaining data within blocks of no value to me.
1. As a Block Node Operator I want to maintain a block node that stores only the blocks that are important to me so that I do not incur the cost of maintaining blocks that are of no value to me.

Author: Added. Modified the 2nd to highlight that it's block ranges. This will be interesting and will need coordination with backfill logic

| --------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Block Node**                    | A software system intended to process a Block Stream and store blocks. The content of a Block Stream is defined in HIP 1056, among others.         |
| **Block Number**                  | A monotonically increasing number assigned by consensus to each block produced by the network.    |
| **Publisher**                     | An entity publishing blocks to a Block Node via the `publishBlockStream` API. This is typically a Consensus Node or another Block Node.                         |
| **Subscriber**                    | An entity that subscribes to a verified block stream from a Block Node.  |
| **Verified Block**                | A verified block is a block for which a Block Proof is received and for which the TSS signature of the network ledger ID is valid.  |
| **Full History Block Node**       | A Block Node that maintains block history from network streaming start.  |
| **Archive Block Node**            | A Block Node that maintains block history but does not expose consumer API services.  |

> | **Rolling History Block Node**    | A Block Node that maintains blocks but prunes them after a configured period of time.  |

Reviewer 2: Light Node, maybe ?

Reviewer: Using names common in other networks, such as "Light Node", implies a lot of things not stated and not accurate about block nodes _because_ the name is common in other networks (which don't have the hashgraph algorithm).
It's _very_ hard to connect block nodes to node types in other networks without creating confusion, as they really don't properly match the setup used anywhere else.

Reviewer 2: I proposed Light Block Node as naming, because the other two already somewhat match the naming of nodes from other environments, like [geth](https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/fundamentals/sync-modes) (for example). And it might be easier for folks from other networks, if we are consistent with the naming that they are familiar with. 

However I agree with you, and in the future we might add additional template, which more closely match Light Nodes behaviour. So it's fine either way 👍

Author: @georgi-l95 makes a suggestion.

After reading the definitions more though I do see the potential for confusion.
For example Ethereum nodes reprocess the blocks. Block Nodes by default will not, only store them.
Full Ethereum Notes only store the most recent 128 blocks in full, the others are pruned either fully or partially. Full Block Nodes by default will store all details. 
It's possible in future that Partial BNs might do interesting things in pruning.

[Light clients](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/light-clients/) also tend to hold just block headers are will reach out to other providers to get block details as needed. Block Nodes by default will have a full block. Although the backfill feature will reach out to fill in and in future we could add logic to request a missing block on request. Light status would also be somewhat reached by a Block Node that filters out all BlockItems expect BlockHeader

If we wanted alignment in naming we'd have to
1. Keep Archive as is
2. Scrap the current definition of Full and adopt the Ethereum definition which is really partial as very old blocks aren't available in full.
3. Add logic and definitions for BNs to get single blocks on request when missing

I definitely think light BNs will show up in the future though as a way to optimize storage and support quick analytics

Will leave definitions as is for now. Worth a follow up ticket in the BN repo in there's a desired consideration that could be follow up on in the future.

        BlockNode-->>Publisher: Send EndStream response with error code
        Publisher-->>BlockNode: Retry publishing with exponential backoff
        Note over Publisher: May connect to alternate Block Node
        BlockNode-->>Subscriber: Send EndStream with error code
        Note over Subscriber: Should resume streaming from another Block Node
        BlockNode-->>BlockNode: Recover or await manual recovery
    end
```

Publish block stream API response codes and their details are noted below

| Response code        | Description   |  
| -------------------- | ------------- |  
| `UNKNOWN`            | The server software failed to set a status, and SHALL be considered a software defect. |  
| `SUCCESS`            | The Block Node ended the stream in an orderly manner. |  
| `TIMEOUT`            | The delay between requests was too long. |  
| `DUPLICATE_BLOCK`    | A block was sent that is already verified and persisted. |  
| `BAD_BLOCK_PROOF`    | A block proof did not verify, the publisher should resend. |  
| `BEHIND`             | The block sent is newer than the block node can receive. |  
| `INTERNAL_ERROR`     | The block node encountered an error. |

> > When the publisher is a consensus node it is important to expose error cases that suggest a blocks node is falling

Author: Updated

    consensus network activity.
2. As a Block Node Operator, I want to verify block proofs as part of block stream ingestion, so that I can ensure the
    authenticity and integrity of the data I store and serve.
3. As a Block Node Operator, I want to persist block data and create state snapshots, so that I can provide historical 
    access and recovery capabilities to other nodes and clients.

> 4. As a Block Node Operator, I want to serve real-time ad historical block streams via a `subscribeBlockStream` API, so 

Author: Fixed

#### Mirror Node Operators
1. As a Mirror Node Operator, I want to consume verified block and state data from a Block Node, so that I can serve

>     reliable RESTful APIs to applications and developers.

Author: Appreciate the suggestion. Update it.
